Dev (#7)
kenlabs/go-ipld-prolly-trees: docs/IPLD-ProllyTree-Spec.md

# IPLD Prolly Tree Spec
## Summary

> IPLD Prolly Tree is a index module that is based on the ProllyTree and IPLD.It uses the ProllyTree algorithm(combination of B-Tree and Merkle Tree) but the storage and tree nodes are implemented by IPLD node and store.So IPLD ProllyTree has advantages that exit in IPLD and ProllyTree such as any IPLD node input, structure share,  low updating while tree mutating and so on.And it can be used as some database index such as Dolt, IPLD-Prolly-Indexer, or used in ADL. It’s powerful in some fields like fact diff, version control, It works really well for storing structured data with git-like semantic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IPLD Prolly Tree is a index module that is based on the ProllyTree and IPLD. It uses the ProllyTree algorithm(combination of B-Tree and Merkle Tree) but the storage and tree nodes are implemented using the IPLD suite of tools and specifications. IPLD ProllyTrees have advantages from both IPLD and ProllyTree such as supporting any IPLD node for values, deduplication, reducing the number of changed nodes when updating a tree, and more. It can be used as a database index similar to Dolt (via our IPLD-Prolly-Indexer library), or used as an ADL. It’s powerful in some fields like fact diff, version control, It works really well for storing structured data with git-like semantics.
```

## Architecture

![img6](./images/spec/img_6.png)

Core structure of (IPLD)ProllyTree is the ProllyTree.It includes the vital fields and api to use such as Get, Search, Delete…Some of them don’t update the tree, but some will do that and rebuild the tree. ProllyTree does not store the total tree in the structure, it only saves the root node.Reading the relative tree path from nodestore while some traversal action is happening

![img7](./images/spec/img_7.png)

Framework is used for tree building. We input sorted data into the framework then call the BuildTree to get a new ProllyTree from the data.The tree is built level by level(bottom) by LevelBuilders. Leaf nodes are linked by parent nodes by the cid link(IPLD node). All nodes are saved in NodeStore referenced by cid.

![img8](./images/spec/img_8.png)

> IPLD ProllyTree implemented the IPLD ADL(Advanced Layout) interface based on above structures.It includes ProllyTreeADLPrototype, Builder, TreeAssembler(MapAssembler) and ADL Node. It helps people who want to build large map(dict) by ProllyTree with ADL in IPLD world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IPLD ProllyTree implemented the IPLD ADL(Advanced Data Layout) interface based on above structures. It includes ProllyTreeADLPrototype, Builder, TreeAssembler(MapAssembler) and ADL Node. It helps people who want to build large map(dict) by ProllyTree with ADL in IPLD world.
```

## Modules
### Storge(NodeStore)

```golang
type NodeStore interface {
	WriteNode(ctx context.Context, nd *ProllyNode, prefix *cid.Prefix) (cid.Cid, error)
	ReadNode(ctx context.Context, c cid.Cid) (*ProllyNode, error)

	WriteTree(ctx context.Context, tree *ProllyTree, prefix *cid.Prefix) (cid.Cid, error)
	ReadTree(ctx context.Context, c cid.Cid) (*ProllyTree, error)

	WriteTreeConfig(ctx context.Context, cfg *TreeConfig, prefix *cid.Prefix) (cid.Cid, error)
	ReadTreeConfig(ctx context.Context, c cid.Cid) (*TreeConfig, error)

	WriteProof(ctx context.Context, prf Proof, prefix *cid.Prefix) (cid.Cid, error)
	ReadProof(ctx context.Context, c cid.Cid) (Proof, error)

	LinkSystem() *ipld.LinkSystem

	Close()
}
```

> NodeStore is an import module that saves almost all information and data of ProllyTree. It is used anywhere in the project such as tree building, updating, getting…… We can also read the saved tree before. The nodestore we use in the project is based on the blockstore(ipfs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NodeStore is an important module that saves almost all information and data of ProllyTree. It is used anywhere in the project such as tree building, updating, getting, etc. It can also read previously saved tree nodes. The nodestore we use in the project is based on the IPFS blockstore interface.
```

### ProllyTree
```golang
type ProllyTree struct {
ProllyRoot
root       ProllyNode
ns         NodeStore
treeConfig TreeConfig
treeCid    *cid.Cid

mutating  bool
mutations *Mutations
}
```

> ProllyTree is the core part in the project, it provides api for people to use the tree, it can also play the role as a package like in ADL, IPLD-Prolly-Indexer. The root node(ProllyNode) is the entry of the tree. When we need traverse the tree or some branch path in tree, we read the cidlink in node value and get relative node from NodeStore by cid.TreeConfig contains important information about the prollytree such as node size limit, hash function, cid version, codec and so on.It is set while building from framework.Mutations is used for tree mutating(updating), we won’t update for every mutating action such as putting(includes inserting and modifying), deleting.Mutations caches these actions then apply them while Rebuilding is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ProllyTree is the core part in the project, it provides api for people to use the tree, it can also play the role as a package like in ADL, IPLD-Prolly-Indexer. The root node(ProllyNode) is the entry of the tree. When we need traverse the tree or some branch path in tree, we read the cidlink in node value and get relative node from NodeStore by cid.TreeConfig contains important information about the prollytree such as node size limit, hash function, cid version, codec and so on.It is set while building from framework.Mutations is used for tree mutating(updating), we won’t update for every mutating action such as putting(includes inserting and modifying), deleting. Mutations caches these actions then apply them when calling `Rebuild()`.
```
